Feature/2018 08 06 kickstarter traject summer 2018 (#446)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2018-08-06-Kickstarter-Trajectory-2018-Summer.md

---
layout: post
authors: [wout_meskens, sander_smets, michael_dewree, steven_deleye, ken_keymolen]
title: "Kickstarter Trajectory 2018 Summer Edition"
image: /img/kicks.png
tags: [Spring, Spring Boot, Angular, Unit Test, Mocking, Microservices, Git, DevOps, Docker, Typescript, Kickstarter, Security]
category: Kickstarters
comments: true
---

## Introduction
>54 young professionals started the Ordina Kickstarter trajectory, on the 1st of August, this summer. 
JWorks counted 5 kickstarters: Sander, Steven, Ken, Wout en Michaël. All looking for a challenge and a fresh start. 
Some just graduated from school, others already had multiple years of experience, IT related or not. 
The goal was to broaden every kickstarter’s knowledge of the fast evolving IT world. 
We learned the basics of every hot topic which will definitely give us enough credits for our first project.

> The kickstarter trajectory consisted of 2 parts: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kickstarter trajectory consisted of two parts: 
```

> * 1 month covered with all kinds of trainings: technical, non-technical, backend, frontend, devops...  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* One month covering all kinds of trainings: technical, non-technical, backend, frontend, DevOps...  
```

> * After our minds were filled with all this information, there was a devcase where we could put everything we learned into practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* After our minds were filled with all this information, there was a dev case where we could put everything we learned into practice.
```

## First Day
On the first day of the kickstarter trajectory we were welcomed into the company and got an introduction about the structure of the company. 
After that we took a tour around the building where we were told what the different workspaces are and where the different teams work. 
It was nice to notice that everyone we met was very friendly and helpful, this made us feel directly at ease.
On the first day we also received the keys of our car and a laptop so we were equipped to begin our journey at Ordina.

## Security
In the beginning of the trajectory we got an introduction of the most important security principles also including information security like GDPR. 
This is very important to Ordina because all its consultants need to always have this information in the back of their minds when working at a customer.
We also followed a more technical security course which explained some of the most common attacks and how to avoid them.

## Backend

### Java

> In this lecture given by [Yannick De Turck](/author/yannick-de-turck/){:target="_blank"}, we were introduced to all new features of Java 7 and 8 aswell as Java 9.

Reviewer: We also saw Java 10. ;-)
https://github.com/ordina-jworks/kickstarter-trajects/blob/master/2018/kickstarter-traject-summer/java-7-8-9-10/java-10-jworks-yannick-de-turck.pdf

We started off with Java 7 where we learned:
* Switch-statement with String values
* Automatic Resource Management
* Diamond Syntax
* Better exception handling with multi-catch
* Literal Enhancements
* The new IO API
* Fork Join Framework
* JVM Enhancements

Java 8 also introduced some useful new features:
* Lambda Expressions
* Extension Methods
* Functional Interfaces
* Method and Constructor References
* Streams and Bulk Data Operations for Collections
* Removal of PermGen
* New Date & Time API
* New Default API for Base64 Encoding
* Improvements for Annotations
* Performance Improvements

Last but not least we had an introduction of Java 9:
* Project Jigsaw: Modules
* Project Kulla: JShell
* Factory Methods for collections
* Diamond operator for anonymous inner classes
* Try-with-resources enhancement
* CompletableFuture API improvements
* Underscore ('_') character is a keyword
* Private methods in interfaces
* HTTP 2.0 Client
* Process API Improvements
* Reactive Streams
* Optional improvements
* Collectors Improvements
* Stream improvements

> In the afternoon we made a few exercises on these new features and improvements which gave us a brighter view on the possibilities within present java development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the afternoon we made a few exercises on these new features and improvements which gave us a brighter view on the possibilities within present Java development.
```

### Spring and Spring Boot
The lectures of Spring and Spring Boot were given by [Ken Coenen](/author/ken-coenen){:target="_blank"}. 
These were spread over two days where the first day was an overal introduction to Spring fundamentals, followed by a second day where we have put everything into practice.

#### Day 1:
The first day we got an introduction to Spring and Spring Boot about the core fundamentals and concepts of JPA, Beans and Application contexts. 
After that we went further into the features of the framework where we were introduced to Spring Web Services and Spring Security.

#### Day 2:
On the second day we made a small project where we created a backend application to fetch all information of different digital coins (Cryptocurrencies). 

> We learned how to read data from an API using DTO's and store them into a database. At the end of the day we had a fully working backend application which fetched all information automatically and exposed it to different endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We learned how to read data from an API using DTOs and store them into a database. 
At the end of the day we had a fully working backend application which fetched all information automatically and exposed it to different endpoints.
```

<img alt="SpringBoot" src="{{ '/img/2018-08-06-Kickstarter-Trajectory-2018-Summer/be-course.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" class="image fit">

### Microservices

> This course gave a brief overview of the microservices architecture. 

Reviewer: Also refer to the teacher(s) (idem dito for the other sessions), seeing as you guys referred to them in the previous two sessions in order to be consistent.

We learned when this is best applicable. 
This can be applied when there is a monolith that is responsible for multiple different tasks. 

> It could be better in that case to split of these different tasks into multiple microservices. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It could be better in that case to split off these different tasks into multiple microservices. 
```

> The advantages of doing that are the possibility to deploy the different microservices separately and the possibility to upscale the resources of some microservices that receive the biggest loads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the advantages of doing that is the possibility to deploy the different microservices separately and the possibility to upscale the resources of the microservices that receive the biggest loads.
```

### Clean Code
During this course of clean code we learned the best practices of how to write clean code. 
This improves the readability and performance of our applications which is of great importance to Ordina.

## Frontend

> Front-end courses included html/css/javascript, buildtools, typescript and Angular. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frontend courses included HTML/CSS/JavaScript, build tools, TypeScript and Angular. 
```

#### Build tools: 

> In this course, we started off with Node.js and its features like asynchronous and event emitters. NPM and other package managers were 

Reviewer: Asynchronous what? Programming?

```suggestion
In this course, we started off with Node.js and its features like asynchronous programming and event emitters.
NPM and other package managers were 
```

Reviewer: "NPM and other package managers were "
This sentence is cut off?

#### Typescript: 

> In the typescript course, we build further on Node.js and NPM. We did an exercise about School management where we used OO-programming and CRUD in typescript. This was pretty challenging but with each other help, we managed to get the final assessment done. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the TypeScript course, we built further on Node.js and NPM. 
We did an exercise about school management where we used OO-programming and CRUD in TypeScript. 
This was pretty challenging but with each other's help, we managed to get the final assessment done. 
```

#### Angular: 
Angular was the last frontend course. This helped us to quickly create a frontend that is connected to a backend project. Here, we went more in-depth on the SPA framework and how different components interact with each other.

## Devops

> The trajectory also included courses about the devops culture. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trajectory also included courses about the DevOps culture. 
```

> We got some introductions to docker, kubernetes and CI/CD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We got some introductions to Docker, Kubernetes and CI/CD.
```

### Docker & Kubernetes
These courses were given by [Tom Verelst](/author/tom-verelst). 
He explained us the basics of containerization, more specifically how this is done by Docker.
During this hands-on session we learned how to work with containers and images. 
We learned how to use, create and delete them. 
There was also an explanation of the theory behind containerization and what the advantages are of using this, especially when compared to using virtual machines.

> To orchestrate the containers, we received a course on Kubernetes. There we learned about the concepts of pods, secrets, ... 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To orchestrate the containers, we received a course on Kubernetes. There we learned about the concepts of pods, secrets, and more.
```

We practiced this in a small exercise where we needed to configure a Minikube and run a simple application.

### Cloud
The last technical session we followed was about different cloud technologies. This was given by [Dieter Hubeau](/author/dieter-hubau/) and [Bas Moorkens](/author/bas-moorkens/).
We learned about the advantages of running applications in the cloud and what the differences are between the different operation models.
To make this more tangible, we went into multiple cloud platforms to see what the possibilities were. 

> At the end we focussed on Openshift Origin as this is one of the preferred container management packages inside JWorks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end we focussed on OpenShift Origin as this is one of the preferred container management packages inside JWorks.
```

## Soft Skills
Besides sharpening our technical skills we worked on our soft skills as well.

> In the 2 day session 'Essentials of Communication' we learned how to present ourselves by means of role playing games and cases that reflect real world scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the 2-day session 'Essentials of Communication' we learned how to present ourselves by means of role playing games and cases that reflect real world scenarios.
```

After an additional 'Brand Yourself' session we were ready to prove and present ourselves as worthy consultants against the management of Ordina.
All these techniques are also useful in the Agile & Scrum methodologies where we learned the importance of being prepared for change.

## DevCase
<img alt="Devcase" src="{{ '/img/2018-08-06-Kickstarter-Trajectory-2018-Summer/fe-preview1.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" class="image fit">

####  Introduction
In the second month of the kickstarter trajectory we were assigned to develop an event planner.
The purpose was to have more of an overview and control of the upcoming JWorks events.
In short, JWorks employees can create and approve events depending on their rights.
In addition, a weekly digest of the events is sent to the Telegram JWorks chat group and a bot is made available with some defined commands.

#### Technology & Methodologies

> Together with our coaches [Orjan De Smet](/author/orjan-de-smet){:target="_blank"}, [Axel Bergmans](/author/axel-bergmans){:target="_blank"} and Haroun Pacquée we started off with an introduction to the project where the user stories on the scrum board were presented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Together with our coaches [Orjan De Smet](/author/orjan-de-smet){:target="_blank"}, [Axel Bergmans](/author/axel-bergmans){:target="_blank"} and Haroun Pacquée we started off with an introduction to the project where the user stories on the Scrum board were presented.
```

After defining the sprint goal for the coming two weeks we divided ourselves into a frontend and a backend group. 

> Using scrum methodology we held our daily stand up meetings and as soon as new functionality was developed a pull request was made and reviewed by our coaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Scrum methodology we held our daily stand-up meetings and as soon as a new functionality was developed a pull request was made and reviewed by our coaches.
```

> Every two weeks at the end of the sprint a demo was shown to our coaches followed by a retrospective and a sprint planning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every two weeks, at the end of the sprint, a demo was shown to our coaches followed by a retrospective and a sprint planning.
```

> By making use of continuous integration code changes in Github were automatically deployed in Openshift where a Jenskins pipeline checked the different stages from testing the code and the code quality to the build of the docker image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By making use of Continuous Integration, code changes in Github were automatically deployed to OpenShift where a Jenkins pipeline went though different stages ranging from testing the code and code quality, to building the Docker image.
```

Frontend tools that were used in the project:
 * Angular
 * Angular-CLI
 * Angular Material
 * Jest 
 
In the backend we made use of the following technologies:
 * Java 8
 * Spring Boot
 * Mockito and JUnit
 * Telegram API

>  * Keycloak Security

Reviewer: I think it would be interesting to also talk a bit more about Keycloak and the security setup.

> For more technical details of the used tools and technologies of the DevCase a separate blog post will follow!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more technical details of the used tools and technologies of the DevCase, a separate blog post will follow!
```

By making use of Continuous Integration, code changes in Github were automatically deployed to OpenShift where a Jenkins pipeline went through different stages ranging from testing the code and code quality, to building the Docker image.

Frontend tools that were used in the project:
 * Angular
 * Angular-CLI
 * Angular Material
 * Jest 
 
In the backend we made use of the following technologies:
 * Java 8
 * Spring Boot
 * Mockito and JUnit
 * Telegram API
 * Keycloak Security
 
For more technical details of the used tools and technologies of the DevCase, a separate blog post will follow!

<img alt="DevCase" src="{{ '/img/2018-08-06-Kickstarter-Trajectory-2018-Summer/fe-preview2.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" class="image fit">

### Personal Experiences
#### [Ken Keymolen](/author/ken-keymolen){:target="_blank"}

#### [Sander Smets](/author/sander-smets){:target="_blank"}

#### [Wout Meskens](/author/wout-meskens){:target="_blank"}

#### [Steven Deleye](/author/steven-deleye){:target="_blank"}

#### [Michael De Wree](/author/michael-de-wree){:target="_blank"}
>The Kickstarter Trajectory was not easy, but achievable. 

> This made me so much the more excited. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This made me so much more excited. 
```

In the second month of the kickstarter trajectory we were assigned to develop an event planner.
The purpose was to have more of an overview and control of the upcoming JWorks events.
In short, JWorks employees can create and approve events depending on their rights.
In addition, a weekly digest of the events is sent to the Telegram JWorks chat group and a bot is made available with some defined commands.

#### Technology & Methodologies

> Together with our coaches [Orjan De Smet](/author/orjan-de-smet){:target="_blank"}, [Axel Bergmans](/author/axel-bergmans){:target="_blank"} and Haroun Pacquée we started off with an introduction to the project where the user stories on the scrum board were presented.

Reviewer 2: No reference to Haroun?

### Personal Experiences
#### [Ken Keymolen](/author/ken-keymolen){:target="_blank"}
>The kickstarter traject provides the means to learn new evolutions & new technologies within the IT world.
Through the DevCase it gave us a good understanding how to incorporate the new technologies within an IT project. 

> Kickstarter provides a solid base to continue to build our skills & expertise in the different areas IT has to offer,

Reviewer: I would rewrite this sentence because it sounds a bit odd?
